minghangli-uni tips on how to interpret truncation log files (#1048)
COSIMA/MOM6-CICE6: documentation/docs/pages/Tips-and-tricks.md

## Tips and tricks

### MOM6 velocity truncations

#### 1. Background

> MOM6 includes a safety mechanism to prevent numerical instability from excessively large velocities. In ACCESS-OM3 configurations, truncation is based on a CFL criterion ([`CFL_BASED_TRUNCATIONS = True`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om3-configs/blob/16b2eca8f711aee5cd5e64529fecacef61e5903e/docs/MOM_parameter_doc.all#L1517-L1518)), with the default trigger at [CFL > 0.5](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om3-configs/blob/16b2eca8f711aee5cd5e64529fecacef61e5903e/docs/MOM_parameter_doc.all#L1519-L1521). When this threshold exceeds, MOM6 truncates the velocity and writes a detailed diagnostic record to `U_velocity_truncations` and/or `V_velocity_truncations`, which lists all relevant terms in the momentum equation at the affected grid point. To prevent the model from continuing in ann unstable state, MOM6 will abort the run if truncations occur too frequently, controlled by [`MAXTRUNC = 10000`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om3-configs/blob/16b2eca8f711aee5cd5e64529fecacef61e5903e/docs/MOM_parameter_doc.all#L2447-L2450).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MOM6 includes a safety mechanism to prevent numerical instability from excessively large velocities. In ACCESS-OM3 configurations, truncation is based on a CFL criterion ([`CFL_BASED_TRUNCATIONS = True`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om3-configs/blob/16b2eca8f711aee5cd5e64529fecacef61e5903e/docs/MOM_parameter_doc.all#L1517-L1518)), with the default trigger at [CFL > 0.5](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om3-configs/blob/16b2eca8f711aee5cd5e64529fecacef61e5903e/docs/MOM_parameter_doc.all#L1519-L1521). When this threshold exceeds, MOM6 truncates the velocity and writes a detailed diagnostic record to `U_velocity_truncations` and/or `V_velocity_truncations`, which lists all relevant terms in the momentum equation at the affected grid point. To prevent the model from continuing in an unstable state, MOM6 will abort the run if truncations occur too frequently, controlled by [`MAXTRUNC = 10000`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om3-configs/blob/16b2eca8f711aee5cd5e64529fecacef61e5903e/docs/MOM_parameter_doc.all#L2447-L2450).
```

Layers:         1 
u(m):  -1.113E+01 
u(3):  -9.386E+00 
CFL u:  7.523E-01 
CFL0 u: 7.523E-01 
CAu:    1.183E+00 
PFu:    4.514E-02 
diffu:  8.407E-01 
a:      0.000E+00  2.155E-09 
hvel:   1.843E-02 
Stress:  -1.662E-01
dubt:  -4.312E-02 

h--:    4.495E-01 
h+-:    1.041E-01 
h-0:    3.484E-02 
h+0:    2.015E-03 
h-+:    2.473E-03 
h++:    1.000E-03 
e-:     3.032E-02 -4.524E-03 
e+:    -3.531E-02 -3.733E-02 
T-:    -1.702E+00 
T+:    -1.707E+00 
S-:     3.140E+01 
S+:     3.149E+01 
vh--:  -1.095E-01 
 vhC--:-1.907E+00 
vh-+:  -7.915E-03 
 vhC-+:-2.059E-01 
vh+-:  -3.593E-03 
 vhC+-:-5.881E-01 
vh++:   0.000E+00 
 vhC++: 0.000E+00 
D:      2.985E+02 2.019E+02
```

- The first line of the above U_truncation_velocity log entry gives the time and location.

    - `Time  1958   0  1.88`: Model time when truncation occured. Here `1958` is the model year, `0` is the yearday, and `1.88` is the fractional day. A helper (`convert_to_date_time`) for converting this into a readable datetime is provided in [Examine_truncation_data.ipynb](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-eval-recipes/blob/main/ocean/Examine_truncation_data.ipynb).

>     - `U-velocity violation`: A zonal velocity was truncated. For meridional velocity truncations, the message will be `V-velocity violation`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - `U-velocity violation`: Indicates truncation of the zonal velocity. Meridional truncations appears as `V-velocity violation`.
```

    - `2009:  21  5`: indicates where the truncation occurred in the model decomposition. Here `2009` is the `processor id`, and the truncation happened at local grid indices (`i=21, j=5`) on that processor.
    - `( -65.25 E   61.37 N)`: The geographic longitude and latitude associated with that grid cell -  global coordinates.
    - `Layers   1 to   1`: The vertical layer range affected. Here it is confined to layer 1 (the surface layer).
    - `dt =  900.0`: The model timestep (seconds) in use when the truncation was triggered.

- Velocities and CFLs

>     - `u(m):  -1.113E+01;  u(3):  -9.386E+00 `: [`u(m)`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/MOM6/blob/3a82c07a999d51cf1cc645edd593d35871c2fba8/src/diagnostics/MOM_PointAccel.F90#L172-L173) is the updated zonal velocity ($m/s$) after completing the momentum solve over the baroclinic timestep. This value is used to evaluate the [CFL condition](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/MOM6/blob/3a82c07a999d51cf1cc645edd593d35871c2fba8/src/diagnostics/MOM_PointAccel.F90#L181-L190) that triggers truncation. [`u(3)`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/MOM6/blob/3a82c07a999d51cf1cc645edd593d35871c2fba8/src/diagnostics/MOM_PointAccel.F90#L178-L179) is the time-averaged u-velocity (`u_av`, $m/s$) over the baroclinic timestep. It represents the refernce baroclinic velocity used for transport, layer-thickness advection and construction of fluxes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - `u(m):  -1.113E+01;  u(3):  -9.386E+00 `: [`u(m)`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/MOM6/blob/3a82c07a999d51cf1cc645edd593d35871c2fba8/src/diagnostics/MOM_PointAccel.F90#L172-L173) is the updated zonal velocity (m/s) after completing the momentum solve over the baroclinic timestep. This value is used to evaluate the [CFL condition](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/MOM6/blob/3a82c07a999d51cf1cc645edd593d35871c2fba8/src/diagnostics/MOM_PointAccel.F90#L181-L190) that triggers truncation. [`u(3)`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/MOM6/blob/3a82c07a999d51cf1cc645edd593d35871c2fba8/src/diagnostics/MOM_PointAccel.F90#L178-L179) is the time-averaged u-velocity (`u_av`, m/s) over the baroclinic timestep. It represents the reference baroclinic velocity used for transport, layer-thickness advection and construction of fluxes.
```

    - `CFL u:  7.523E-01; CFL0 u: 7.523E-01 `: [`CFL0 u`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/MOM6/blob/3a82c07a999d51cf1cc645edd593d35871c2fba8/src/diagnostics/MOM_PointAccel.F90#L188-L190) is the local CFL number at the `U` point using the local grid spacing, while [`CFL u`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/MOM6/blob/3a82c07a999d51cf1cc645edd593d35871c2fba8/src/diagnostics/MOM_PointAccel.F90#L181-L187) is the local CFL number scaled by the effective `T`-cell area adjacent to the `U` point. In this case, the two values are nearly identical, indicating locally uniform grid geometry. However, both exceed the default threshold (0.5), hence trigger velocity truncation.

> - Momentum tendency contributions - reported as velocity changes ($m/s$)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Momentum tendency contributions - reported as velocity changes (m/s)
```

    - [`PFu:    4.514E-02`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/MOM6/blob/3a82c07a999d51cf1cc645edd593d35871c2fba8/src/core/MOM_variables.F90#L149): Zonal pressure-gradient acceleration contribution.
    - [`diffu:  8.407E-01 `](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/MOM6/blob/3a82c07a999d51cf1cc645edd593d35871c2fba8/src/core/MOM_variables.F90#L151): Zonal acceleration due to lateral viscosity.
    - [`a:      0.000E+00  2.155E-09 `](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/MOM6/blob/3a82c07a999d51cf1cc645edd593d35871c2fba8/src/diagnostics/MOM_PointAccel.F90#L227-L230): Vertical viscosity layer coupling coefficients from vertvisc. For a single layer, two values are printed because the layer has an upper and lower interface.
    - [`hvel:   1.843E-02 `](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/MOM6/blob/3a82c07a999d51cf1cc645edd593d35871c2fba8/src/diagnostics/MOM_PointAccel.F90#L231-L234): Scaled layer thickness at `U` grid points from vertvisc.
    - [`Stress:  -1.662E-01`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/MOM6/blob/3a82c07a999d51cf1cc645edd593d35871c2fba8/src/diagnostics/MOM_PointAccel.F90#L235-L237): Contribution from surface wind stress over the timestep.

>     - [`dubt:  -4.312E-02 `](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/MOM6/blob/3a82c07a999d51cf1cc645edd593d35871c2fba8/src/diagnostics/MOM_PointAccel.F90#L239-L243): Barotropic acceleration contribution to the baroclinic `U` velocity over one timestep. This term helps diagnoise if the barotropic solver injects a large velocity into the baroclinic field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - [`dubt:  -4.312E-02 `](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/MOM6/blob/3a82c07a999d51cf1cc645edd593d35871c2fba8/src/diagnostics/MOM_PointAccel.F90#L239-L243): Barotropic acceleration contribution to the baroclinic `U` velocity over one timestep. This term helps diagnose if the barotropic solver injects a large velocity into the baroclinic field.
```

- Layer thicknesses and interfaces

>     - [`h--:    4.495E-01; h+-:    1.041E-01; h-0:    3.484E-02; h+0:    2.015E-03; h-+:    2.473E-03; h++:    1.000E-03 `](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/MOM6/blob/3a82c07a999d51cf1cc645edd593d35871c2fba8/src/diagnostics/MOM_PointAccel.F90#L246-L257): These are the horizontal layer thicknesses (meters) sampled from surrounding tracer (`T`) cells. These values describe the effective mass used by the momentum scheme, which is constructed from neighbouring `T` cells rather than taken from a single column. In this case, `h+0 = 2.015E-03` and `h++ = 1.000E-03` are nearly zero, indicating local mass collapse. This strongly suggests that the truncation is driven by vanishing layer thickness instead of unusually large forcings. For example, `CAu` appears large, but this is the consequence of the collapsed `h` not an indication of excessive Coriolis forcing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - [`h--:    4.495E-01; h+-:    1.041E-01; h-0:    3.484E-02; h+0:    2.015E-03; h-+:    2.473E-03; h++:    1.000E-03 `](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/MOM6/blob/3a82c07a999d51cf1cc645edd593d35871c2fba8/src/diagnostics/MOM_PointAccel.F90#L246-L257): These are the horizontal layer thicknesses (meters) sampled from surrounding tracer (`T`) cells. They define the effective layer thickness at the velocity point, which is used by the momentum equation to form the volume fluxes (`uh`/`vh`). In this case, `h+0 = 2.015E-03` and `h++ = 1.000E-03` are nearly zero, indicating local mass collapse. This strongly suggests that the truncation is driven by vanishing layer thickness instead of unusually large forcings. For example, `CAu` appears large, but this is the consequence of the collapsed `h` not an indication of excessive Coriolis forcing.
```

@chrisb13 how about this?

    - [`e-:     3.032E-02 -4.524E-03; e+:    -3.531E-02 -3.733E-02 `](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/MOM6/blob/3a82c07a999d51cf1cc645edd593d35871c2fba8/src/diagnostics/MOM_PointAccel.F90#L260-L268): Vertical coordinates of layer interfaces for the left tracer column (`e-`) - the left side of the `U` point (`T(i,j)`), and `e+` to the column on the right (`T(i+1,j)`). Hence there are two values for either `e-` or `e+`.

- State variables

    - [`T-:    -1.702E+00; T+:    -1.707E+00; S-:     3.140E+01; S+:     3.149E+01 `](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/MOM6/blob/3a82c07a999d51cf1cc645edd593d35871c2fba8/src/diagnostics/MOM_PointAccel.F90#L269-L280): temperature and salinity sampled in the left tracer column (`-`) and right tracer column (`+`) adjacent to the `U` point. These fields directly influence the pressure-gradient force at the truncation location. Here differences are small, indicating that a sharp T/S front is unlikely to be the primary cause of instability.

- Transport terms feeding the `U` momentum equation

>     - [`vh--:  -1.095E-01;  vhC--:-1.907E+00; vh-+:  -7.915E-03;  vhC-+:-2.059E-01; vh+-:  -3.593E-03;  vhC+-:-5.881E-01; vh++:   0.000E+00;  vhC++: 0.000E+00 `](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/MOM6/blob/3a82c07a999d51cf1cc645edd593d35871c2fba8/src/diagnostics/MOM_PointAccel.F90#L293-L339): Meridional mass fluxes (`vh--`, `vh-+`, `vh+-`, and `vh++`)  surrounding the `U` point, used to construct the meridional advection of zonal momentum, where terms with `C` represent reconstructed centered estimates.

Author: I think of these as volume fluxes. (I note that you earlier defined "effective mass used by the momentum scheme" but I'm not sure what is meant by that.)

>     - [`vh--:  -1.095E-01;  vhC--:-1.907E+00; vh-+:  -7.915E-03;  vhC-+:-2.059E-01; vh+-:  -3.593E-03;  vhC+-:-5.881E-01; vh++:   0.000E+00;  vhC++: 0.000E+00 `](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/MOM6/blob/3a82c07a999d51cf1cc645edd593d35871c2fba8/src/diagnostics/MOM_PointAccel.F90#L293-L339): Meridional mass fluxes (`vh--`, `vh-+`, `vh+-`, and `vh++`)  surrounding the `U` point, used to construct the meridonal advection of zonal mometum, where terms with `C` represent reconstructed centered estimates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - [`vh--:  -1.095E-01;  vhC--:-1.907E+00; vh-+:  -7.915E-03;  vhC-+:-2.059E-01; vh+-:  -3.593E-03;  vhC+-:-5.881E-01; vh++:   0.000E+00;  vhC++: 0.000E+00 `](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/MOM6/blob/3a82c07a999d51cf1cc645edd593d35871c2fba8/src/diagnostics/MOM_PointAccel.F90#L293-L339): Meridional mass fluxes (`vh--`, `vh-+`, `vh+-`, and `vh++`)  surrounding the `U` point, used to construct the meridional advection of zonal momentum, where terms with `C` represent reconstructed centered estimates.
```
